Feat(Mesh): Multi-zone deployment (#5077)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/mesh/mesh-multizone-service-deployment.md

---
title: 'Multi-zone deployment'
description: 'Group equivalent MeshServices across zones and expose a unified, zone-agnostic service with global failover capabilities.'
content_type: reference
layout: reference
products:
  - mesh
breadcrumbs:
  - /mesh/

min_version:
  mesh: '2.6'

tags:
  - multi-zone
  - zones

related_resources:
  - text: Mesh DNS
    url: '/mesh/dns/'
  - text: '{{site.mesh_product_name}} resource sizing guidelines'
    url: '/mesh/resource-sizing-guidelines/'
  - text: '{{site.mesh_product_name}} version compatibility'
    url: '/mesh/version-compatibility/'
  - text: Install {{site.mesh_product_name}}
    url: /mesh/#install-kong-mesh
  - text: Multi-zone authentication
    url: '/mesh/multi-zone-authentication/'
  - text: 'Single-zone deployment'
    url: '/mesh/single-zone/'
  - text: '{{site.mesh_product_name}} data plane on Kubernetes'
    url: /mesh/data-plane-kubernetes/
  - text: "{{ site.mesh_product_name }} data plane proxy"
    url: /mesh/data-plane-proxy/
  - text: "{{site.mesh_product_name}} data plane on Universal"
    url: /mesh/data-plane-universal/
  - text: Service discovery
    url: /mesh/service-discovery/
---

> {{site.mesh_product_name}} supports running your service mesh in multiple zones, including a mix of Kubernetes and Universal zones. Your mesh environment can include multiple isolated service meshes and workloads running in different regions, on different clouds, or in different data centers. A zone can be a Kubernetes cluster, a VPC, or any other deployment you need to include in the same distributed mesh environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{site.mesh_product_name}} supports running your service mesh in multiple zones, including a mix of Kubernetes and Universal zones. 
Your mesh environment can include multiple isolated service meshes and workloads running in different regions, on different clouds, or in different data centers. 
A zone can be a Kubernetes cluster, a VPC, or any other deployment you need to include in the same distributed mesh environment.

If you're looking for a simpler deployment mode, see [Single-zone deployments](/mesh/single-zone/).
```
A crosslink to the other deployment type would be helpful here. In this case, "simpler" feels fine to say, since it's a direct comparison.

> The only condition is that all the data planes running within the zone can connect to the other data planes in the same zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a multi-zone deployment, all the data planes running within the zone can connect to the other data planes in the same zone.
```
Is this "can" or "must be able to"?

    end

    GCP <-->|KDS| ZCPA
    GCP <-->|KDS| ZCPB
    ZCPA <-->|xDS| DPPA & ZEA & ZIA
    ZCPB <-->|xDS| DPPB & ZEB & ZIB
    DPPA -->|outbound| ZEA -->|cross-zone| ZIB -->|inbound| DPPB
    DPPB -->|outbound| ZEB -->|cross-zone| ZIA -->|inbound| DPPA
{% endmermaid %}

## How it works

{{site.mesh_product_name}} abstracts away zones, so your data plane proxies find services wherever they run.
You can make a service multi-zone by having data planes use the same `kuma.io/service` in different zones. This gives you automatic failover of services if a specific zone fails.

Let's look at how a service `backend` in `zone-b` is advertised to `zone-a` and a request from the local zone `zone-a` is routed to the remote
service in `zone-b`.

### Destination service zone

When the new service `backend` joins the mesh in `zone-b`, the `zone-b` zone control plane adds this service to the `availableServices` on the `zone-b` `ZoneIngress` resource.
The `kuma-dp` proxy running as a [zone ingress](/mesh/zone-ingress/) is configured with this list of
services so that it can route incoming requests.
This `ZoneIngress` resource is then also synchronized to the global control plane.

> The global control plane propagates the zone ingress resources and all policies to all other zones over {{site.mesh_product_name}} Discovery Service (KDS), which is a protocol based on xDS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the new service `backend` joins the mesh in `zone-b`, the mesh handles it as follows:
1. The `zone-b` zone control plane adds this service to the `availableServices` on the `zone-b` `ZoneIngress` resource.
1. The `kuma-dp` proxy running as a [zone ingress](/mesh/zone-ingress/) is configured with this list of
services so that it can route incoming requests.
1. This `ZoneIngress` resource is synchronized to the global control plane.
1. The global control plane propagates the zone ingress resources and all policies to all other zones over {{site.mesh_product_name}} Discovery Service (KDS), which is a protocol based on xDS.
```

### Source service zone

The `zone-b` `ZoneIngress` resource is synchronized from the global control
plane to the `zone-a` zone control plane.
Requests to the `availableServices` from `zone-a` are load balanced between local instances and remote instances of this service.

> Requests sent to `zone-b` are routed to the zone ingress proxy of `zone-b`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `zone-b` `ZoneIngress` resource is synchronized from the global control
plane to the `zone-a` zone control plane, the following happens:
* Requests to the `availableServices` from `zone-a` are load balanced between local instances and remote instances of this service.
* Requests sent to `zone-b` are routed to the zone ingress proxy of `zone-b`.
```

When using [transparent proxying](/mesh/transparent-proxying/) (default in Kubernetes), {{site.mesh_product_name}} generates a VIP and a DNS entry with the format `<kuma.io/service>.mesh`, and listens on the service VIP port (default 80).

{:.info}
> A zone ingress is not an API gateway. It only handles cross-zone communication within a mesh. API gateways are supported in {{site.mesh_product_name}} [gateway mode](/mesh/ingress/) and can be deployed in addition to zone ingresses.

## Components of a multi-zone deployment

A multi-zone deployment includes:

{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Component
    key: component
  - title: Responsibilities
    key: responsibilities
rows:
  - component: Global control plane
    responsibilities: |
      * Accept connections only from zone control planes.
      * Accept creation and changes to [policies](/mesh/policies/) that will be applied to the data plane proxies.
      * Send policies down to zone control planes.
      * Send zone ingresses down to zone control planes.
      * Keep an inventory of all data plane proxies running in all zones (this is only done for observability but is not required for operations).

>       * Reject connections from data plane proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Accepts connections only from zone control planes.
      * Accepts creation and changes to [policies](/mesh/policies/) that will be applied to the data plane proxies.
      * Sends policies down to zone control planes.
      * Sends zone ingresses down to zone control planes.
      * Keeps an inventory of all data plane proxies running in all zones (this is only done for observability but is not required for operations).
      * Rejects connections from data plane proxies.
```

  - component: Zone control planes
    responsibilities: |
      * Accept connections from data plane proxies started within the zone.
      * Receive policy updates from the global control plane.
      * Send data plane proxies and zone ingress changes to the global control plane.

>       * Compute and send configurations using XDS to the local data plane proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Compute and send configurations using xDS to the local data plane proxies.
```

      * Update the list of services available in the zone in the zone ingress.
      * Reject policy changes that do not come from the global control plane.
  - component: Data plane proxies
    responsibilities: |
      * Connect to the local zone control plane.

>       * Receive configurations using XDS from the local zone control plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Receive configurations using xDS from the local zone control plane.
```

      * Connect to other local data plane proxies.
      * Connect to zone ingresses to send cross-zone traffic.
      * Receive traffic from local data plane proxies and local zone ingresses.
  - component: Zone ingress
    responsibilities: |
      * Receive XDS configuration from the local zone control plane.

>       * Proxy traffic from other zone data plane proxies to local data plane proxies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Receives xDS configuration from the local zone control plane.
      * Proxies traffic from other zone data plane proxies to local data plane proxies.
```

  - component: Zone egress (optional)
    responsibilities: |
      * Receive XDS configuration from the local zone control plane.
      * Proxy traffic from local data plane proxies to zone ingress proxies from other zones.

>       * Proxy traffic from local data plane proxies to external services from local zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Receives xDS configuration from the local zone control plane.
      * Proxies traffic from local data plane proxies to zone ingress proxies from other zones.
      * Proxies traffic from local data plane proxies to external services from the local zone.
```

      * On mTLS-enabled meshes, a data plane proxy may fail to refresh its client certificate before it expires (defaults to 24 hours), causing traffic failures.
      * Data plane proxy configuration won't be updated.
    still_works: |
      * Communication between data plane proxies.
      * Cross-zone communication.
      * Other zones are unaffected.
  - mode: Communication between global and zone control plane failing
    impact: |
      Can occur when there is a misconfiguration or network connectivity issues between control planes.

      * Policy changes won't propagate to the zone control plane.
      * `ZoneIngress`, `ZoneEgress`, and `Dataplane` changes won't propagate to the global control plane, leaving the global inventory of data plane proxies outdated.
      * Other zones won't see new or removed services from this zone, or changes in instance counts.
      * Local data plane proxies won't see new or removed services from other zones, or changes in instance counts.
    still_works: |

>       * All operations inside the zone: data plane proxies can join, leave, and receive configuration updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * Data plane proxies can join, leave, and receive configuration updates.
```

      * Local and cross-zone application traffic.
  - mode: Communication between two zones failing
    impact: |
      Can occur when there are network connectivity issues between: a control plane and zone ingress or egress from another zone; a zone egress and zone ingress from another zone; or when all zone ingress or egress instances in a zone are down.

      * Cross-zone communication fails.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Can occur when there are network connectivity issues:
       * Between a control plane and zone ingress or egress from another zone.
       * Between a zone egress and zone ingress from another zone.
       * All zone ingress or egress instances in a zone are down.
        
      <br>In this situation, all cross-zone communication fails.
```
Without the br, the formatting with be weird.
